<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# phsopendata

<!-- badges: start -->

[![GitHub release (latest by
date)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata)](https://github.com/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata/releases/latest)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata?branch=master)
<!-- badges: end -->

`phsopendata` contains functions to interact with open data from the
[Scottish Health and Social Care Open Data
platform](https://www.opendata.nhs.scot/) via the CKAN API.

-   `get_resource()` extracts a single resource from an open dataset by
    resource id
-   `get_latest_resource()` extracts the most recent resource from
    applicable datasets, by dataset name
-   `get_dataset()` extracts multiple resources from an open dataset by
    dataset name
-   `list_datasets()` returns the names of all available datasets
-   `list_resources()` returns information on all resources within an
    open dataset by dataset name

`phsopendata` can be used on both Posit Workbench and desktop versions
of RStudio.

## Installation

You need to install `phsopendata` from GitHub, which requires a package
like `remotes` or `devtools`.

Using `remotes` you run this to install the package:

    remotes::install_github("Public-Health-Scotland/phsopendata",
      upgrade = "never"
    )

## Examples

### Downloading a data table with `get_resource()`

To extract a specific resource, you will need its unique identifier -
resource id. This can be found in the dataset metadata, the URL of a
resourceâ€™s page on <https://www.opendata.nhs.scot/>, or extracted using
`list_resources()`.

    library(phsopendata)

    # define a resource ID
    res_id <- "a794d603-95ab-4309-8c92-b48970478c14"

    # download the data from the CKAN database
    data <- get_resource(res_id = "a794d603-95ab-4309-8c92-b48970478c14")

### Querying/filtering data with `get_resource()`

You can define a row limit with the `rows` argument to get the first *N*
rows of a table.

    # get first 100 rows
    get_resource(
      res_id = "a794d603-95ab-4309-8c92-b48970478c14",
      rows = 100
    )

You can use `col_select` and `row_filters` to query the data server-side
(i.e., the data is filtered before it is downloaded to your machine).

    # get first 100 rows
    get_resource(
      res_id = "a794d603-95ab-4309-8c92-b48970478c14",
      col_select = c("GPPracticeName", "TelephoneNumber"),
      row_filters = list(
        HB = "S08000017",
        Dispensing = "Y"
      )
    )

### Downloading multiple tables with `get_dataset()`

To extract all resources from a dataset, you will need to use the
*dataset name*. Note that this will differ from the *dataset title* that
displays on the website. This can be found using `list_datasets()`, or
taken from the dataset URL.

In this example, we are downloading GP Practice Population Demographics
from:
[opendata.nhs.scot/dataset/*gp-practice-populations*](https://www.opendata.nhs.scot/dataset/gp-practice-populations),
so the dataset name will be gp-practice-populations.

    # if max_resources is not set, all resources will be returned by default.
    # Here we pull 10 rows from the first 2 resources only
    get_dataset("gp-practice-populations", max_resources = 2, rows = 10)

## Contributing to phsopendata

At present, this package is maintained by [Csilla
Scharle](https://github.com/csillasch).

If you have requests or suggestions for additional functionality, please
contact the package maintainer and/or the [PHS Open Data
team](phs.opendata@phs.scot).

If you would like to share examples of how you work with open data, you
can also do so in the [Open Data
repository](https://github.com/Public-Health-Scotland/Open-Data), where
example scripts and resources are collated.
